Greg Ashman    00:00:07    Welcome to the filling pail podcast. I'm Greg Ashman. And with me for this episode is John Sweller. America's professor of educational psychology at the university of new south Wales. Welcome John.

John Sweller    00:00:20    Thank you very much.

Greg Ashman    00:00:21    And I suppose for full disclosure, we should let anyone listening knows that, uh, your honor, my PhD supervisors. So we, we do have, we do know each other already.

John Sweller    00:00:31    Yes. We've known each other for some years. Yeah,

Greg Ashman    00:00:34    We have actually I'm when we've published together, um, based on liar, PhD research. So yeah, anyways,

John Sweller    00:00:42    Uh, uh, for anyone who wishes to know Greg's PhD is going wonderfully.

Greg Ashman    00:00:50    Thanks, John. Thanks. Um, now most listeners, if they know your work, they will know you're associated with the field of cognitive load theory. I mean, that's, that, that should be the one thing people would know. Um, and I want you to start by asking you about some of the history of cognitive load theory. How did it get started and was it something to do with you taking a sabbatical in America?

John Sweller    00:01:14    No, I don't think so. Yeah. Uh, no, it was, uh, look at, uh, a lot of people ask me this question and it's always very difficult to answer because cognitive load theory, uh, it, it was developed rather than sort of discovered it was, uh, it, it, it, it was developed over decades and it's still being developed. Uh, the closest I can really find, uh, something that started the theory was a, um, uh, a series of experiments that are carried out. I can't even remember the weather in the 1970s or 1983, a long time ago. I was concerned with, um, uh, looking at people solving problems and the problems I had were, um, problems of the sort where people were given a, uh, a stock number. And now we're told here's the goal number that you have to get to and to get to it. There are only two moves, two types of moves.

John Sweller    00:02:34    You can make, you can multiply by three, whenever you want to, you can subtract by. I think the number was 27 whenever you want to. And you have to go from the start number to the goal number. And the problem is organized in such a way so that every single problem could only be solved by alternating multiply by three, subtract 27. So a certain number of times people found these problems fairly easy, just about all of them solved all of the problems and all of them solved them by alternating because that was the only way you could solve them. And yet, after they solved the problems, when I tested to see whether they discovered the alternation rule, most of them hadn't you had, but most hadn't. And it, I mean, this was a puzzle problem that in itself is not an education. You significant thing, but I was puzzled. How could they have alternated their moves, which is what they had to do, and not even be aware of it. It is a bit strange. It was strange in it. And okay. I thought, well, if that's the case for this puzzle problem, what if it applies to proper educational problems?

John Sweller    00:04:09    That was the real start of cognitive load theory because I, I, it, it was, it's been well-known for many, many decades. Well, before I ran these experiments, that working memory is extremely limited and the obvious conclusion was well, okay. If you're trying to solve a problem, you're trying to get to the goal. You can get to the goal, but because working memory is so limited, by the time you get to the goal, you don't really know what you've done. And many of us would have come across that ourselves. We would have solved a problem and oh, wow. I've got to the solution. How did I do that? It's, it's, it's, it's not a, it's not something totally unknown. Most people know about it. And, uh, uh, that was probably as far as I can find a stat to cognitive load theory, that was probably the beginning.

Greg Ashman    00:05:11    So the idea we'd explained that we'd say, now, we'd say, well, there was enough sort of working memory to solve the problem, but there wasn't any leftover to sort of notice the pattern. And it just is, it proves in a slightly artificial sentence, but it proves that you could solve a problem and not learn the pattern that was involved in that. And so if we extrapolated that, that, that could be, you potentially, you could have students solving math problems, but not figuring out the generalizing from them and learning rules and procedures and things like that.

John Sweller    00:05:46    Exactly. And the whole point in a classroom of giving somebody a problem to solve, unless it's a task. Yeah. Oh, oh, purpose is okay, they're going to learn. And it, it was obvious, extremely obvious in the case of those particular problems. Look, if I wanted to teach them how to alternate, I don't have to give them a problem so much. And I look to solve this problem. You alternate all the way through. And, uh, they could solve any problem, no matter how many, no matter how many moves it was that some of these people, I gave them 16 problems to solve, and they solved all of 'em. And I didn't know, they solved them by ordination it's, uh, uh, but you know, if I'd told them so all of these by ordination, and there's no reason why you shouldn't generalize that to problem solving education or context like mathematics or science, or in B writing essays or whatever, uh, you might be able to solve the problem doesn't mean you've learned. And the whole point of giving problems to people in an educational context is they're going to learn something. They might be better ways of learning.

Greg Ashman    00:07:01    And this was quite at odds as I understand it with the, um, the, the established sort of thinking at the time in the late seventies, early eighties around problem-solving. I mean, I remember I was one of the kids when I was a primary school, where we were given the little, um, the little robots that you have to control with the computer using the logo computing language, see more pepper, so idea that you'd learn programming and by doing that. So that was very much the Vogue at the time. So I'm assuming that people didn't necessarily pick up on this idea with great enthusiasm.

John Sweller    00:07:36    No, uh, it, it took decades for people to, uh, start to accept this. And to some extent, there's still a lot of people out there who don't accept it. So it's, uh, it's not, uh, it's not an easy thing to sell. Uh, the, the, the, the idea of problem-based learning inquiry based learning, they are very, very strong. There is really no theoretical justification for anything other than explicit instruction. There's a lot of theoretical justification for the explicit instruction, but intuitively a lot of us feel our, look, we want kids to be good at solving problems. How do we, how do we get them to be good at solving problem? The whole not let let's give them problems to solve turns out that's counterintuitive for, uh, many, many people.

Greg Ashman    00:08:46    It's, it's, it is fairly obvious. Isn't it in a way that that's what you would do, because we would, you think you'd get better at it. Like you would develop problem solving skills by solving lots of problems.

John Sweller    00:08:56    Exactly. And, and indeed you do get better at it, but it's long and slow and very inefficient in beading effective.

Greg Ashman    00:09:10    So, um, can you give us then, like the sort of, that's the starting point of cognitive load? So, um, could you give it like a fairly, I mean, you've written books on this, so, uh, it, it's a difficult question I'm asking you, but can you give us a fairly brief outline of cognitive load theory and some of its sort of main implications?

John Sweller    00:09:32    Okay. I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll talk about some aspects of it. Uh, ultimately one needs to read about it, to get all the details, but the main point about cognitive load theory is that it flows directly from some aspects of human, cognitive architecture that are in no way in dispute. Uh, one of those aspects is working memory and its limitations and working memory is, is the structure we use when we're dealing, when we're initially processing information. And it is well known and has been well known since the 1950s or before that working memory is extremely limited in capacity can hold very little information, extremely limited in duration can stay Tiro stays in working memory for no more than about 20 seconds, unless you keep rehearsing it. So that's the first thing. Once the information is processed, it can go into long-term memory and long-term memory, a it's permanent memory.

John Sweller    00:10:59    And the importance of long-term memory is it has no limitations, no limitations of capacity that we know of now, limitations of duration that we know of once something is in long-term memory, once it's been processed and organized and stored in long-term memory, it can go, it can go back into working memory and the limitations of working memory disappear at that point. Yeah. The limitations of working memory that I mentioned before only occur for novel information. And of course, in an education context, that's absolutely critical because the students are getting novel information all the time. That's the whole purpose of education, but once information is stored in long-term memory, it can be brought back into working memory and the limitation. There are no limitations of working memory when it's dealing with information from long-term memory that provides us with the justification for education. We are transformed.

John Sweller    00:12:07    Once we have a lot of information in long-term memory, we can do things we couldn't dream of doing beforehand. We, it means that the purpose of education is to allow people to store lots and lots of information in long-term memory because it's that, that transforms them. It's that, that allows them to function in a way that we know education allows you to function. Yeah. So that, that's the, that's the basic structure. It's much more than that than we may be able to touch on some of it, uh, MITRE on what, what does that mean for instructional procedures? Well, we we've generated a huge range of instructional effect. Uh, I'm not going to talk about all of them, but, uh, uh, going back to what we was saying right at the beginning, one of the effects is the worked example effect. Yeah. Instead of having somebody solve a problem, which is places, a heavy load on working memory, give him a worked example, demonstrate, give him the problem, demonstrate it, solution the details of the solution and tell them, okay, study this solution rather than solve the problem, study this solution. And there've been dozens, possibly hundreds on now. I've been many, many experiments demonstrating the worked example effect for complicated information. If you show somebody a worked example, compare that to an equivalent group of people who, uh, solve the equivalent problem, then give everybody a problem-solving test, give them problems to solve the result. People who have been shown worked, examples are better at solving problems than people who have actually solved the problems.

Greg Ashman    00:14:19    And the, the, the question I get a lot and it feels intuitive, but, um, some people say, yeah, well, okay. So it might be less efficient to learn by solving problems. Uh, it might be more efficient to learn from work examples, but don't, you somehow learn it better if you figure it out for yourself.

John Sweller    00:14:38    Yeah. You'd think so. I wouldn't knew, but yeah, the answer is no, the answer is no. Um, uh, we, we simply cannot find any evidence that figuring out a complex problem by yourself. It gives you a great feeling, you know, all that work and ah, finally got a solution. But when you test people afterwards, best you'll get no difference at worst. You'll get the person who was shown how to solve it by doing much better. He'd cause more has gone into long-term memory. In other words, if, if, if somebody is better at doing something, it's because there's more information in longterm memory, you get more information in long-term memory by studying somebody's solution, then you do by working it out yourself

Greg Ashman    00:15:37    And you probably get a, possibly a more robust understanding because if you work something out for yourself, I mean, I, I gave the example. I gave the example in, uh, a talker a while back of, uh, figuring out how to replace the flushing, my toilet. So I had to figure out how to flip. Cause I had got this terrible diagram that came with it from Bunnings and I had to, so basically how to figure it out myself. I spent the next week wondering whether the toilet was going to flood. I didn't feel like I'd understand, understood it particularly well, even though I used to figure it out and I'd probably have benefited from an expert explaining to me exactly why this had to go there and that had to do that

John Sweller    00:16:17    Precisely and humans have evolved. And that we're one of the very few species on earth who have evolved to obtain information from each other. We're really, really good at it. Setting up an education system where we don't obtain information from an expert, a teacher, in other words, based on what we know about human cognitive architecture is just silly.

Greg Ashman    00:16:50    Didn't make any sense. One thing on the human cognitive architecture. So I get, um, obviously I write about cognitive load theory a lot. So I get a lot of the queries and questions. So that's where some of this is probably going to go. But one of the things people say to me is, oh yeah, but working memory long-term memory. That's too simple. What about sensory buffers? What about the fact that you could have some people say that there's like a working long-term or long-term working memory or something? And I say to them, well, okay. Like the point is not that this is a full and accurate description of everything. The point is that it's the working memory long-term memory model is a model it's not supposed to fully inaccurately represent every aspect of the human mind, but it's a model that is sufficient for making predictions about doing X. And then you can do the experiments and you can see where the predictions, um, hold or not. Um, and I just wondered if you had any, any thoughts on that?

John Sweller    00:17:51    Yeah, no, that's quite hard. Uh, there's never been any suggestion that working memory and long-term memory comprise the sum total of the human cognitive system, where you've extracted those particular structures and the intricate relations between them. They're the relations between the mouth a really clever we've extracted those because they are relevant to instruction now, uh, is sensory member memory part of the human cognitive system? Of course it is. Is it relevant to instruction? Well, I can't find any relevance if somebody demonstrates that it's relevant. Terrific. I've no problem with that at all. Uh, long-term working memory is simply another way of describing how information that goes from long-term memory into working memory is different from information that goes in the other direction. So in effect, cognitive load theory does take into account long-term working memory. We tend not to use the term so much. That's a, uh, an Erickson term and it's, it's perfectly acceptable. Uh, and it's more or less saying the same as what we're saying, but, uh, it's, uh, it's, it's using a couple of words connected with a dash rather than trading long-term memory and working memory is two separate structures.

Greg Ashman    00:19:34    I remember writing about this in, in draft bit of my thesis and sort of writing about the different ways you can conceptualize how long items in long-term memory brought into working memory news. And I wrote about, I think, three different ways. And I think you, or Slava struck one of the three out and said, don't talk about that one. But then after I'd finished writing about the two I had to say, but of course it doesn't actually make any difference, whichever way you think of this.

John Sweller    00:20:02    Yeah. Yeah. That's it? That, that it's functionally identical. That's that's that's absolutely correct. Yeah.

Greg Ashman    00:20:09    Um, now can we clear one thing up? I think there's also, this was, this one actually came up in, um, in the T S a couple of years ago, a British education newspaper that some people seem to think that all the research that supports cognitive load theory has been done with undergraduate students in universities and therefore is not relevant to, uh, school classrooms.

John Sweller    00:20:35    Yes. I heard of that. In fact, you, you, you probably were the person who, uh, alerted me to it. It's, it's really strange because there literally hundreds and hundreds of experiments that have been carried out on cognitive load theory. I'm not sure that any of them have used university students, I guess some way, but I can't, I can't think of any off hand. Uh, the vast bulk of them have used, um, school kids. Uh, again, this is a gift I'd say 80 or 90%. Most of the rest have been people like industrial apprentices. We've been learning something like electrical engineering. Uh, some people have done. Yeah. Yeah. Some people have done, uh, experiments on cognitive load theory using medical students, obviously they're undergraduates. It would be a few percent. I, I, I have no idea where this came from. No

Greg Ashman    00:21:48    Idea. I, I wonder whether it's, I, lot of the, my hypothesis is that a lot of the testing effects, sorry, we call it, what do you call it? That retrieval practice? A lot of the retrieval practice, um, uh, research was done with, um, undergraduates. I think I, and again, I made the artist, maybe that's a misconception as well, but I wonder whether people are conflating the two

John Sweller    00:22:13    Possibly, although, uh, the, the people who seem to think, uh, there were one or two names that were given to me, uh, um, uh, who thought most of it was done with the, um, with undergraduates, by my have known about the testing effect. Um, I'm not sure. That's just, uh, um,

Greg Ashman    00:22:36    And now one of the, um, I remember early on, uh, uh, coming up to Sydney and talking to you about cognitive load theory and some ideas and stuff, and talking about working memory, being bottleneck. Now we've sort of addressed this already, but you do see it a lot. You do see people talk about working memory, being a bottleneck. Um, and in some ways it may be a good analogy, but you corrected me. You said, wait a bit. That's not, that's not quite right. Um, so can you explain why that's not really the right way of thinking about working memory?

John Sweller    00:23:06    Look, let me in by saying yes, it is a bottleneck when one is dealing with novel information when you're dealing with novel information, uh, that, that that's an excellent analogy. That's exactly. You can only get a bit of information from sensory memory into working memory and then onto long-term memory, that bottleneck is not apparent. It disappears when you go in the opposite direction and keep in mind the purpose of education, get stuffed into long-term memory, and then you can use it. And at that the bottleneck disappears, which again is a major reason why education is so incredibly important, why it's transformational, because we can do things easily. In some ways, almost unconsciously, once we've got proper stored information in long-term memory, it changes us education changes, and it changes us because working memory no longer has those constraints. Yeah.

Greg Ashman    00:24:23    Um, one of the w which some people, um, uh, who are skeptical about cognitive load theory will point to, uh, Gary's, uh, theory of evolutionary educational psychology, uh, which is seen as foundational to cognitive load theory. Um, so can we just unpack that a bit before we talk about, um, what, what potential criticisms might be? What, what is, uh, Gary's theory and how does it relate to cognitive load theory? Like, what are the implications for

John Sweller    00:24:55    The theory? Okay. Uh, the main aspects of de-risk theory that are relevant to cognitive load theory and instruction, uh, the main aspect is his distinction between what he calls biologically primary knowledge and biologically primary knowledge is knowledge. We have evolved to acquire. In other words, uh, we don't have to be taught biologically primary knowledge. We will automatically pick it up, uh, in normal life. Biologically secondary knowledge is knowledge we can acquire, and that might be important to us for cultural reasons, but we weren't acquired unconsciously automatically easily. We have to work on it, and we invented schools to deal with biologically secondary knowledge. And because of that distinction, we can see that schools, that cognitive load theory basically applies to biologically secondary knowledge. It doesn't apply to biologically primary knowledge. In other words, that, that, that, that working memory, long-term memory, cognitive architecture that I talked about earlier that, uh, and the relations between the two that applies to biologically secondary information, it doesn't apply to biologically primary information. And for that reason, uh, we need that distinction.

Greg Ashman    00:26:39    So biologically primary information can just go straight into long-term memory without the working memory constraints.

John Sweller    00:26:46    Pretty much. Yeah. Yeah. As far as far as we know, uh it's uh, it's, it's it's information we just acquire automatically. Uh, we, we don't, we don't have to, uh, uh, consciously think about it or learn it, or have it presented to us, uh, just living in a normal society. Uh we'll we'll pick, we'll pick it up. And, uh,

Greg Ashman    00:27:10    And then the sorts of things we're talking about are learning your mother, tongue, maybe navigating your local area, that sort of thing,

John Sweller    00:27:19    Uh, knowing how to navigate. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Uh, whether your local areas, I, uh, uh, the suburban area or a city or the, or a forest, uh, you know, you, you, you, you, you, you have to learn that local area, but the, uh, uh, you'll automatically navigated, uh, solving problems, you know, in, in, in, in general, uh, nobody tells you how to go about solving a problem. I mean, you know, if you've got a problem to solve, you can try to solve it. Now. He said, okay, when you solve a problem, this is how you go about doing it. I mean, some people seem to think that ought to be in the education system, but, uh, for people who think that I, you know, my, my usual retort is, is, uh, well, what problem solving strategy have you been taught? Have you learned that needs to be taught to students? And, uh, uh, the answer is normally a blank stare. And of course, if you can't describe the problem solving strategies that you use, how are you going to teach them?

Greg Ashman    00:28:39    What about this? What about this challenge say, so presumably, um, a, a strategy could be evolutionarily adaptive, Joe struggled to split that out then, but socially maladaptive. So for instance, if we get people together in groups, one of the phenomenon you might see is social loafing. So someone's sitting back and letting other people in the group do all the work that's evolutionarily adaptive, because you have to do less work, but we don't want people in the workforce say to do that. So is there something in the idea that we should maybe sort of teach people collaborative working skills then to try and get around that? Perhaps

John Sweller    00:29:27    That's a good question. Um, uh, my guess is no, uh, what you do need is some structures, which ensure that people love that that's, that's easily done. Uh, you know, you, you, you put in structures to make sure people don't live, but you don't have to teach people how to collaborate. I mean, again, if, um, if somebody comes to me and says, oh, look, you know, we, we, we, we need these enormous modules in education, which teach people how to collaborate. Now, the obvious answer is, okay, how do you collaborate? Cause you know, we all collaborate. It's a part of human nature, biologically primary. Uh, and because we all collaborate, it's, uh, it's, it's impossible to find a strategy that, that you can teach people and say like, this is how you collaborate. At least not one that isn't self-evident. Yeah,

Greg Ashman    00:30:44    Yeah. Like taking interns and things like that. I suppose. I suppose you do that with little kids in prep maybe, but then what you're doing, I suppose, is you're socializing them perhaps into a particular culture.

John Sweller    00:30:59    That's right. That's right. You know, when, when you, when, when you're in a classroom, this is, this is how you've got to be hive that's. Uh

Greg Ashman    00:31:09    Hmm. So, um, okay, so here's, uh, here's another one to throw in there. So we've got this categorization categorization, um, of biologically primary and biologically secondary. And what people say to me is that there's lots of things that you can't easily say is one thing or the other. Um, so for instance, you know, uh, running presumably is biologically primary. Cause we all learn to run, but elite runners, uh, we'll have a coach that will teach them aspects of running. So isn't this, doesn't this point to the idea that running sits across the two categories?

John Sweller    00:31:48    No, because they're two different things. The, uh, we're not taught how to run as, as you indicate. So biologically primary, if we want to learn how to win a race, that's something else you need a coach for that you need a coach who says, look, when you're running a rice, this is, this is the best way of, of winning it. Uh, I don't know the details. I don't run races. There's a knowledge base there. And it's a knowledge base which, uh, needs to be taught. And, uh, until I dunno, 20, 30, 40 years ago, we didn't know about it. It wasn't taught, I mean, the, uh, uh, post second world war runners, uh, I don't know whether they had a coach and, uh, my guess is they didn't, there was nothing, nothing to, nothing to coach since then. We've learned a lot more and there's something to coach now. Yeah.

Greg Ashman    00:33:03    So we've learned additional information about, I know conserving again, I'm not a runner either, so this isn't probably the best example, but conserving energy or something like that. And we can now teach that, but that's not something we would sort of figure out through the biologically promo primary process of learning to run.

John Sweller    00:33:24    Yeah. It's, it's, it's a different thing. Uh, look, I should perhaps say a little bit more about the importance of biologically primary and biologically secondary issues. Um, what, what, one of the, one of the issues that, that we faces a lot of people talk about, um, learning naturally learning, uh, look at, look at, look at how easy it is. Look to learn outside of the classroom. What have the difficulties students have learning in the classroom? Yeah. And until this distinction came along, I had no answer to that. It's a, it was a good argument. It was a logical argument. It made sense. We learn much more easily outside the classroom. Therefore we ought to bring those natural procedures that are used outside of the classroom, into the classroom and things like problem-based learning and inquiry based learning. They came entirely, as far as I can work out from that. There's no theory behind them. There's no, you know, people don't say, oh, look at our cognitive architecture and therefore your to engage in inquiry learning or problem-based learning. Yeah. It came entirely from that extremely visible difference.

Greg Ashman    00:34:54    Yeah. It's like whole language. People say, people, kids pick up their mother tongue just by being immersed in an environment where people are talking. So therefore we surround them with books and they'll learn to

John Sweller    00:35:06    Exactly. That was exactly it. And same with mathematics, you know, give them a little bit, but mainly they should learn it themselves and they'll learn it. I mean, learning to listen and speak is probably the most complex thing that humans do. And it's so complex and we learned it so well, let, let's transfer it into the classroom and have people learn naturally. Yeah. And I had no answer to that. And then David Geary's work came along and all of a sudden that was the answer. Now you'll get a lot of people who will object to the distinction because of course I have to object to the distinction, the rationale for inquiry learning and problem-based learning disappears. Once you have that distinction between biologically prominent, biologically secondary, the reason we learn better outside of the classroom, because we're learning different things. Yeah.

Greg Ashman    00:36:11    Things that we've evolved to learn because that they've contributed to our survival over hundreds of thousands, millions of years. Whereas things like writing have only been around for a few thousand years. And, um, so we, we couldn't have evolved to, uh, be able to do this thing.

John Sweller    00:36:32    W w we haven't evolved to do those things. And, uh, uh, you can see the difference until very recently, you know, a hundred, 150 years ago, the vast majority of the people couldn't read and write, despite like the writing had been around, as you said, for thousands of years, it didn't mean that people could read and write a very small number of people could read and write most of them didn't we had to set up modern education systems. Uh, you don't have to set up more than education systems to have people listening and speaking. Yeah. But there's that, there's that difference. And the cognitive architecture is different as well. And the procedures we need to teach reading and writing and arithmetic and mathematics and history and everything else, I have to be different as well. And as I say, I can, I can understand why people, uh, object to that distinction because it utterly eliminates and which something, which until very recently with the full rationale and the only rationale that I can make out for the difference between, uh, for the, uh, emphasis that people put on, um, uh, inquiry based and problem-based learning and teaching critical thinking and all, or now they call them 21st century skills as though people didn't need to do any of this before the 21st century.

Greg Ashman    00:38:13    Um, one of the things people say is, uh, look evolutionary psychology more generally, it's, it's hard to test. It's hard to do experiments. We, we sort of extrapolate back from now towards the past, but evolution often takes slightly different, um, convoluted pathways. Like you, you know, if you strap like back from the past, you think that feathers evolved for flight, but we know now is that the first feathers are on dinosaurs that didn't fly in all this. So are we, are we just telling a, just so story that just happens to fit now and we're extrapolating back to the past and coming up with this primary and secondary thing, or, or is there something testable there are, we are going to be able to test Gary's theory,

John Sweller    00:38:57    Look in a way you can test that by picking out, uh, things that we know, uh, we've evolved to acquire. I mean, you know, the walking is the obvious example, you know, let let's, let's see if we can teach a kid to learn the walk much faster. Now they normally learned a walk at, I don't know, about one year of age or something like that, or a bit less, or let let's, let's see if we can teach them the walk at a much younger age so that we better walk and better runners. Well, you can't. Yeah, it just doesn't work. Um, and, and the, the, the ultimate test is let's see if people can learn to read and write without being taught. Well, we've done that test. We did that test for several thousand years and we know the answer. Yeah. I just want it's a in, in most cases.

Greg Ashman    00:40:11    Yeah. So let's briefly circle just, they sounds very, um, I'm just enjoying putting these, uh, the criticisms that I often get, uh, to you and tune them over. So let's just do with a few more before we move on. Um, okay. So, uh, load is not directly with real measurable and, uh, realized in Thailand self-report.

John Sweller    00:40:33    Yes. Uh, it is true. We cannot very, very precisely have independent measures of cognitive load. And there's a good reason for that. And that reason goes right back to the cognitive architecture we described before. If, if we want to measure how much information somebody is processing, or what sort of unload it's imposing, what sort of load that information is imposing, we can, we can, uh, use bits and bytes and all sorts of complicated procedures, which will tell us something about that information. But those calculations will tell us absolutely nothing. Absolutely nothing about what's in somebody as long-term memory. Yeah. And that is critical because it changes everything, uh, something which I may find incredibly difficult, imposing an immense cognitive load. You may be able to deal with immediately and almost without thought. Yeah. Because it's in long-term memory. So in order to measure the cognitive load, the two things you have to measure simultaneously, you have to measure the characteristics of the information and you have to measure what's in the receiver's long-term memory, the learners long-term memory, you have to measure those simultaneously.

John Sweller    00:42:29    And the second one, especially is difficult to do. We can do tests and we do give tests. And some of those tests are incredibly important. And in fact, we're measuring what's in long-term memory through those tests, but it's difficult to get a precise measure. We can get a rough measure. Yeah. That's easy to do. Uh, and we can look at the extremes and that's something that's very low in cognitive load and something very high in cognitive load. That's obvious. Do we have a precise measure now? We don't. So when we have two very close measures of cognitive load, no, we don't have a measure.

Greg Ashman    00:43:16    I think some people would like to be able to, uh, put, um, subjects in a brain scanner and say, oh, well, look, this blood flow means that the working memory is, um, at this level, but we don't even really know where it is. Do we, like, I mean, it's a model, but we couldn't say this is the bit of the brain where this thing is being processed.

John Sweller    00:43:38    Yep, yep. Yep. Uh, working memory, as far as we know is it's, it's not really a structure, it's a procedure, a procedure that's going on in the brain and excuse me, it, it, it may well be that in due course, people work out the details of that procedure, but to, despite all the emphasis on neuro-psychology these days, we've got a long way to go.

Greg Ashman    00:44:11    Okay. So some of the others, um, the germane load controversy that I think we're a bit past that, but some people still bring it up. So that's the idea that germane load made the theory falsifiable,

John Sweller    00:44:26    Uh, viable, possible viable, um, by my role be right. Um, but it doesn't matter. Um, I pretty much have defined Jermaine lo differently and to some extent really don't use it. And the reason for not using it is that there's a lot of those, the ultimate purpose of cognitive load theory is the general cognitive load affects all instructional procedures to generate instructional procedures. And, uh, the other two types of load are extraneous cognitive load and intrinsic cognitive load. We've got several effects, which are due to intrinsic cognitive load. So we need intrinsic cognitive load. Most of the effects are extraneous cognitive load. So we obviously need that. There's not a single effect based on Jermaine, cognitive load. Yeah. Um, it was a good idea when it first came up, but it it's proving are necessary. It doesn't seem to be working. And as, as, as you said, some people complain well, look at it makes the theory unfalsifiable and yeah. Yeah. So

Greg Ashman    00:45:42    It's not necessary. Um, uh, and then the last one, and I haven't got through anywhere near the questions I wanted to, but we'll, we'll press on, uh, the last one of things. So element interactivity, which I got one of the reviews, I wrote a book on explicit teaching and direct instruction and one of the reviews, oh God, nice review on Amazon. But, um, one of the guys complained that I talked too much about element interactivity. So I'll, I will try and I'll try not to go on too much about it, but this is the idea that it's essentially the same argument you're making that load. I mean, the two things are intertwined, but, um, and carpet Capecchi a few years ago, um, you, you wrote a paper, uh, at saying that look that retrieval practice, the testing effect depends on the level of element interactivity and Jeffrey Capecchi. The true retrieval practice guys said, oh, this is a nonsense idea. You can't, you can't count the number of elements blah-blah-blah so what, what's your, what's your response?

John Sweller    00:46:44    It's unavoidable. If we accept that working memory long-term memory, cognitive structure, it's it is true. We can estimate element is interactivity. Yep. That's all we can do because we can only estimate what's up in long-term memory. In other words, we can't know exactly what's in long-term memory measure. It's a measure of complexity and other measures of complexity, which are really, really accurate, but they rely entirely on looking at the information and measuring the characteristics of information and for the human cognitive system that is useless.

Greg Ashman    00:47:39    And I think a lot of people from my, in my experience, a lot of people think that element interactive T really is just a measure of the complexity of the instructional materials. And I think there's a misconception that they don't realize that each, like, if you've got a schema, I know you don't tend to use the word scheme as much anymore, but you've got a schemer of that you can activate in working memory. So three X equals 18. And me as a math teacher, I would say, okay, X is X is six, but someone that I've just activated the whole thing and I've done it like that. And the number of elements I've got to process in my working memory is one, I suppose, cause it's just that one thing. But, um, but for someone who is learning that, um, and maybe isn't even certain about equivalent what the equals means. There's a lot more to process.

John Sweller    00:48:29    There are many, many elements, and that's really the point I made before about, you know, a novice and an expert, uh, full a novice material may be really high in elements of interactivity. Uh, can we measure precisely now for an expert? It may be very low in element interactivity. Uh, we probably can't measure that terribly accurately either, but at the extremes we know, you know, it's, it's really obvious that if something is very high in element interactivity and you get different, different, uh, experimental results, uh, in other words, instruction is different when element of DirecTV is high, as opposed to when it's low and element the whole, the whole reason for using the term element interactivity rather than using the term complexity was because we needed to bring in knowledge in long-term memory. It is unavoidable. It's, it's part of the part of human, cognitive architecture. And, uh, sure. Element it attractively is I theoretical construct. It's not one that we can precisely measure. It's not the first scientific construct, but we can't precisely measure. You sometimes need them on. And it for anyone who knows human, cognitive architecture, it's obvious we have to have something we ought to have element interactivity or something very much like it.

Greg Ashman    00:50:02    And the, and the final point to make, I suppose the other element, the other bit of confusion, it's elements, interactivity. So I think with Chan and, um, and Slover and yourself in a paper, you made the point about the periodic table that, um, although it would be really hard to sit down and learn all the symbols for all the elements of the periodic table, that's, it's a challenging task, but that doesn't mean the elementary interactivity is high because you could learn each discreet symbol on its own within the constraints of working memory, um, because they don't interact with each other. And so that interactivity, like when my three X equals 18 example, the three, the X, the equals and the 18, they all have a relationship to each other.

John Sweller    00:50:47    Yeah, exactly. And, uh, that's right. Um, uh, for, for many, many years now, I keep emphasizing having difficulty getting across nevertheless, but I keep emphasizing. There's a difference between difficulty and element attractivity. It is true. If element interactivity goes up, difficulty goes up, but difficulty can go up without element infectivity changing at all. Uh, the example I, the periodic table example is an obvious one, but, uh, possibly, uh, learning the, um, let's say nouns of a second language as an adult, there are thousands of them and that's an immensely difficult task is how many drafts really high? No, no. You can learn the translation of the word dog and ignore that when you're learning the translation of the word cat, that's a dynamic direct.

Greg Ashman    00:51:48    And, and another example where we might think something's relatively simple, but it's actually got quite high and elementary interacts with these, how we teach kids to write paragraphs. So, um, you might have like, well, we've got a topic sentence that introduces it. And then we've got, depending on what, on exactly what you're trying to do, we then support it with some evidence and we support that with some more evidence, but actually all those things then relate to each other. So you've got to keep them all in mind at the same time in order to be able to complete that task.

John Sweller    00:52:16    Yeah. Yeah. Uh, in fact writing anything, um, uh, one of the, uh, uh, difficulties I have reading work from some students is all the information's there, but it's not connected out. It's like a whole series of unrelated. It's like a list and an essay or a paragraph or an essay is not a list. And, and connecting it up can be, it's a learned skill and it can be fairly difficult.

Greg Ashman    00:52:50    Um, okay. So w we're rapidly running out of time and I wanted to ask you lots about, um, general purpose skills, but we won't, uh, we'll just, um, maybe, maybe you can come on the podcast again, if you, if you feel so inclined, um, what we've both been commenting on, uh, the draft Australian curriculum and the rather disturbing, um, emphasis in the maths curriculum on problem solving and the science curriculum on learning through inquiry. Um, now, uh, one of the things, one of the arguments been put to me on the maths one is, uh, I've, I've pointed to the research, your research and various other people, uh, Dan Willingham, that there are no sort of general purpose problem solving skills now, general purpose, critical thinking skills and what people have put to me they've said, well, yeah, okay, well, we've accepted that, but what we're not focusing on general purpose problem solving skills, we're focusing on mathematical problem skills. So therefore they're domain specific. So we can teach mathematical problem skills and we can get around this problem of the evidence being against general problem solving skills. So is that a good defense?

John Sweller    00:54:07    No, because, um, problem, problem solving is, um, let let's use the example you gave early on, uh, of, uh, uh, three X equals 18, uh, X equals six. Well, when you're teaching somebody to solve that problem, you, you, you, you teach them okay. You're, you're, you've got to, uh, divide out the, uh, uh, uh, the three on both sides. And that gives you an answer. Now that's a domain specific skill. Yeah. It's pretty much as far as I'm aware, useless everywhere, except in algebra, but it's useful in any form of algebra. And do we have to teach that? Yeah, of course we have to teach it.

John Sweller    00:55:05    So can you teach mathematics problem solving skills? Yeah. That's, that's pretty much all that's taught in mathematics problem solving skills, and I've no objection to that, but when people talk about problem solving skills, they're not really talking about solving specific problems. Uh, the term isn't used so much now, but, uh, 10, 15, 20 years ago, people used to say in a derogatory tone on are, they're just routine problems. Yeah. Yeah. We don't want to teach routine problems. We want to teach people to be creative. Yeah. And that's the objection. Now, if the curriculum, the new curriculum really is just talking about domain specific mathematical problem solving skills, I don't, well, I have no objection to that. Whether anybody can read that curriculum and get that interpretation. That's another issue because not the interpretation. I,

Greg Ashman    00:56:17    No, and it's got things in, like, I, it's just quite bizarre, like there's, mathematizing right. Is this thing. And I'm not sure it's not entirely clear whether what VAT is, but it's sitting in there and it involves things like making choices and visualizing,

John Sweller    00:56:36    And you think, well, but

Greg Ashman    00:56:39    Making choices, how do you teach? How do you teach someone to make choices? I get, it's not like completely general it's in the domain of mathematics, but a choice you're going to make in this type of math problem would be a very different choice than you're going to make it. Like, you can only teach it in the specifics.

John Sweller    00:56:59    Yeah. Yeah. Look, they are clearly at that point saying we are going to teach people the general skill of making choices. Yeah. That's what they, they may claim. They're not talking about that, but they are. And if they're not, if, if they're talking about a general skill and I can't see how else you can think about, if they're talking about a general skill, the first question to ask them is pretty much the question we talked about earlier. What general choice skills do you use? Describe them. If you can't describe them, how in the world are we going to teach them the curriculum? Doesn't describe them and it's not described anywhere else. And do humans have to make choices? Yeah. We have to make choices. And it's a biologically primary, uh, characteristic. Uh, and, uh, that biologically primary characteristic is unteachable. We make choices. Some people make good choices because they've got a lot of domain knowledge. Other people make bad choices.

Greg Ashman    00:58:24    Yeah. It's, it's almost, uh, a strange thing to even talk about it, isn't it. But it certainly, I suppose the theory is that by getting kids to make choices in mathematical problems, they will get better in some way at making choices in mathematic problems. It's going right back to the start. We're certainly wrong all the way back to the idea that problem-solving makes you better.

John Sweller    00:58:45    Yeah, exactly. And look, if somebody really believes that, and that idea has been around for at least a hundred years and probably longer run a randomized controlled experiment, give one group of students, uh, making choices, uh, uh, strategy or whatever that might be that do that for another group of students. See if you can find any difference on totally novel problems in their ability to make choices. I can guarantee there will be no difference. And there is no difference.

Greg Ashman    00:59:23    Oh, look, John. Well, we're out of time. I really appreciate talking to you. As I said, um, be good to chat again because the sandwich that I didn't actually get to sort of wanting to talk about, and I think that the people listening, um, we'll, we'll be really interested in, in, in the discussion. So thank

John Sweller    00:59:40    You. Thank you very much. And thanks for your great questions.

